Doc: Better DNS persistence solution for systemd (#14589)
canonical/lxd: doc/howto/network_bridge_resolved.md

Reviewer: Please can you rebase this commit into your first commit so that we only have the final version of the logical change you're making, rather than commits showing the evolution of the PR. This is because we do not do squash merges and so the fully commit history of this PR will be merged into the main branch and we only want to see commits for logical changes.

## Make the `resolved` configuration persistent

### Solution "A"

You can automate the `systemd-resolved` DNS configuration, so that it is applied on system start and takes effect when LXD creates the network interface.

To do so, create a `systemd` network file named `/etc/systemd/network/<network_bridge>.network` with the following content:

```
[Match]
Name=<network_bridge>
[Network]
DNS=<dns_address>
Domains=~<dns_domain>
```

So for example, `/etc/systemd/network/lxdbr0.network` with the following content (your IP, of course):

```
[Match]
Name=lxdbr0
[Network]
DNS=10.167.146.1
Domains=~lxd
```

If you have NOT freshly installed `lxd` (you've rebooted since install), then you only need to reload `systemd-resolved`:

    sudo systemctl restart systemd-resolved.service

In case you **haven't rebooted yet since first initializing `lxd`**, then you need to restart `lxd` first or just reboot (see https://github.com/canonical/lxd/issues/14588):

>     snap restart lxd

Author: I seem to have found a working combination of restarts -- it was not easy :D The order of them also matters:

```
sudo networkctl reload
snap restart lxd
```

Updated the docs.

You can test that the configuration got applied by running:

>     sudo resolvectl status

Author: Removed!

The output should contain a part similar to this (you can see the DNS server and the `.lxd` domain mentioned):

```
[...]
Link 4 (lxdbr0)
    Current Scopes: DNS
         Protocols: -DefaultRoute +LLMNR -mDNS -DNSOverTLS DNSSEC=no/unsupported
Current DNS Server: 10.167.146.1
       DNS Servers: 10.167.146.1
        DNS Domain: ~lxd
[...]
```

This solution "A" is better than solution "B" in the sense that it is more resilient, and gets reapplied if the `lxdbr0` network is re-created for some reason (LXD update+restart occasionally apparently does this).

> 

Reviewer 2: If that solution "A" works reliably (and doesn't require a reboot), I think we'd outright want to get rid of solution "B".

Author: It's up to you, but I personally would leave it there for a while. I'm more reluctant to remove documentation than adding it. :) Maybe remove it after a year or so? But as you say.

## Make the `resolved` configuration persistent

### Solution "A"

You can automate the `systemd-resolved` DNS configuration, so that it is applied on system start and takes effect when LXD creates the network interface.

To do so, create a `systemd` network file named `/etc/systemd/network/<network_bridge>.network` with the following content:

```
[Match]
Name=<network_bridge>
[Network]
DNS=<dns_address>
Domains=~<dns_domain>
```

So for example, `/etc/systemd/network/lxdbr0.network` with the following content (your IP, of course):

```
[Match]
Name=lxdbr0
[Network]
DNS=10.167.146.1
Domains=~lxd
```

> If you have NOT freshly installed `lxd` (you've rebooted since install), then you only need to reload `systemd-resolved`:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### Apply the updated configuration

If you have rebooted since you first installed LXD, you only need to reload `systemd-resolved`:
```

    systemctl restart systemd-resolved.service

> In case you **haven't rebooted yet since first initializing `lxd`**, then you need to either A) reboot the system, or B) reload `systemd-networkd` (to reload the `.network` files) and restart `lxd` (to add the routing).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you have _not_ rebooted your system since you first installed LXD, you must either:
1. reboot the system, or 
1. reload `systemd-networkd` (to reload the `.network` files) and restart `lxd` (to add the routing):
```

    networkctl reload
    snap restart lxd

> You can test that the configuration got applied by running:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can test that the updated configuration was applied by running:
```

    resolvectl status

> The output should contain a part similar to this (you can see the DNS server and the `.lxd` domain mentioned):

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The output should contain a section similar to the example shown below. You should see the configured DNS server and the `~lxd` domain:
```

```
[...]
Link 4 (lxdbr0)
    Current Scopes: DNS
         Protocols: -DefaultRoute +LLMNR -mDNS -DNSOverTLS DNSSEC=no/unsupported
Current DNS Server: 10.167.146.1
       DNS Servers: 10.167.146.1
        DNS Domain: ~lxd
[...]
```

> This solution "A" is better than solution "B" in the sense that it is more resilient, and gets reapplied if the `lxdbr0` network is re-created for some reason (LXD update+restart occasionally does this).

Reviewer 3: Moved this content higher up so that users can read about the differences between the solutions/approaches first.

> This solution "A" is better than solution "B" in the sense that it is more resilient, and gets reapplied if the `lxdbr0` network is re-created for some reason (LXD update+restart occasionally apparently does this).

Reviewer: I dont think we should be using "apparently" in the authoritative docs.

Author: Removed!

### Solution "B"

> You can automate the `systemd-resolved` DNS configuration, so that it is applied on system start and takes effect when LXD creates the network interface.

Reviewer 3: This is a repetition of the exact same sentence as line 75. In my suggested changes, that line is line 77, and it's pulled out above the two approaches so as to apply to both.

> You can automate the `systemd-resolved` DNS configuration, so that it is applied on system start and takes effect when LXD creates the network interface.

Author: Hello Minae,

yes, that's exactly what it means. In the solution "B" the changes get applied once, at boot, and never again, whatever happens.

The origin of the new ("A") approach was that we have servers in double-digits running LXD with the original ("B") solution, and after years of smooth operation suddenly one-by-one they started developing DNS problems (from the host), showing the disadvantage of the "one-shot" approach.

> You can automate the `systemd-resolved` DNS configuration, so that it is applied on system start and takes effect when LXD creates the network interface.

Reviewer 3: Thank you! One more time to make sure I have this really clear, if you don't mind! If I understand correctly:

1. In the recommended approach ("A"), the changes are applied _both_ at 1) system reboot, _and_ 2) at any time that the LXD bridge network is re-created. The LXD bridge network is sometimes re-created _without_ a system reboot, such as occasionally when LXD is restarted. When this happens, the recommended approach will re-apply the changes in `<network_bridge>.network`.

2. In the alternative approach ("B"), the changes are applied _only_ at system reboot. The only way they get re-applied is if the system is rebooted again. They do not get re-applied if the LXD bridge network is re-created _without_ rebooting. Thus, using the alternative approach, if the LXD bridge network is re-created when LXD is restarted, the updated configuration in `lxd-dns-<network_bridge>.service` is _not_ applied. 

Do I have that right? Thanks in advance!

> You can automate the `systemd-resolved` DNS configuration, so that it is applied on system start and takes effect when LXD creates the network interface.

Author: You understand it correctly. Your description of "A" is perfect. 

> In the alternative approach ("B"), the changes are applied only at system reboot. The only way they get re-applied is if the system is rebooted again.

Yes, it gets re-applied on reboot _or_ if you manually run the service again, by running `systemctl restart lxd-dns-lxdbr0.service` (this is the only difference to what you wrote).

> They do not get re-applied if the LXD bridge network is re-created without rebooting. Thus, using the alternative approach, if the LXD bridge network is re-created when LXD is restarted, the updated configuration in lxd-dns-<network_bridge>.service is not applied.

Yes, exactly.

> You can automate the `systemd-resolved` DNS configuration, so that it is applied on system start and takes effect when LXD creates the network interface.

Reviewer 3: >>In the alternative approach ("B"), the changes are applied only at system reboot. The only way they get re-applied is if the system is rebooted again.

>Yes, it gets re-applied on reboot or if you manually run the service again, by running systemctl restart lxd-dns-lxdbr0.service (this is the only difference to what you wrote).

When you say "manually run the service *again*" (emphasis mine), that implies that the service was manually run initially. However, in the alternative ("B") approach instructions, I do not see any instruction to run `systemctl restart lxd-dns-lxdbr0.service`. That instruction only occurs in the recommended approach section. Would you mind clarifying further?

> You can automate the `systemd-resolved` DNS configuration, so that it is applied on system start and takes effect when LXD creates the network interface.

Reviewer 3: Sounds like the first time (with the alternative approach), you run:

```
sudo systemctl daemon-reload
sudo systemctl enable --now lxd-dns-<network_bridge>
```

Then afterward, if needed to re-apply without a reboot, you can run
```
systemctl restart lxd-dns-lxdbr0.service
```

Is that what you mean?

### Recommended approach

#### Create a `systemd` network file

Get the network bridge address with the following command:

```bash
lxc network get lxdbr0 ipv4.address
```

Create a `systemd` network file named `/etc/systemd/network/<network_bridge>.network` with the following content:

```
[Match]
Name=<network_bridge>
[Network]
Address=<network_bridge_address>
DNS=<dns_address>
Domains=~<dns_domain>
```

Example file content for `/etc/systemd/network/lxdbr0.network` (insert your own DNS value):

```
[Match]
Name=lxdbr0
[Network]
Address=10.167.146.1/24
DNS=10.167.146.1
Domains=~lxd
```

#### Apply the updated configuration

If you have rebooted since you first installed LXD, you only need to reload `systemd-resolved`:

    systemctl restart systemd-resolved.service

If you have _not_ rebooted your system since you first installed LXD, you must either:

1. reboot the system, or
1. reload `systemd-networkd` (to reload the `.network` files) and restart `lxd` (to add the routing):

>     networkctl reload

Reviewer 3: ````suggestion
```
networkctl reload
````

Author: Re-signed and added the backticks instead of the TAB-like code block. Will re-push in a moment...

>     snap restart lxd

Reviewer 3: ````suggestion
snap restart lxd
```
````

Reviewer 3: Indentation to create code blocks after a numbered list behaves oddly; best to use Markdown backtick code blocks.

Author: Updated, will push in a moment!

```
[Match]
Name=<network_bridge>
[Network]
DNS=<dns_address>
Domains=~<dns_domain>
```

So for example, `/etc/systemd/network/lxdbr0.network` with the following content (your IP, of course):

```
[Match]
Name=lxdbr0
[Network]
DNS=10.167.146.1
Domains=~lxd
```

#### Apply the updated configuration

If you have rebooted since you first installed LXD, you only need to reload `systemd-resolved`:

    systemctl restart systemd-resolved.service

If you have _not_ rebooted your system since you first installed LXD, you must either:
1. reboot the system, or 
1. reload `systemd-networkd` (to reload the `.network` files) and restart `lxd` (to add the routing):

    networkctl reload
    snap restart lxd

You can test that the updated configuration was applied by running:

    resolvectl status

The output should contain a section similar to the example shown below. You should see the configured DNS server and the `~lxd` domain:

```
[...]
Link 4 (lxdbr0)
    Current Scopes: DNS
         Protocols: -DefaultRoute +LLMNR -mDNS -DNSOverTLS DNSSEC=no/unsupported
Current DNS Server: 10.167.146.1
       DNS Servers: 10.167.146.1
        DNS Domain: ~lxd
[...]
```

### Alternative approach

> 

Reviewer 3: ````suggestion

```{warning}
This approach only automates applying your desired configuration when your system is rebooted. If LXD re-creates its bridge network outside of a system reboot, you must reapply the configuration manually with the following command:

    systemctl restart lxd-dns-<bridge_network>.service

Example:

    systemctl restart lxd-dns-lxdbr0.service
```

````
